---
layout: post
title:      "Male Telepathy"
subtitle:   "VFXing the shootout from Spaced"
date:       "2010-08-20 12:00:00"
author:     "Dave Newson"
thumb_img:  "/assets/media/posts/2010-08-20-spaced/thumb.jpg"
---

I have to blame Freddie Wong for this one.

[Freddie released a “Realistic muzzle flare” tutorial on his FreddieW2 YouTube channel](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SsViAvVYoMQ "http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SsViAvVYoMQ"), detailing some After Effects methods and how to simply apply CG gun effects to any footage. This taught me some simple methods which can be extended into things like compositing blood splats, sparks, explosions, etc. Simply playing with After Effects options will let you do all sorts of effects, based off most the methods Freddie shows in his video.

Inspired by Freddie’s own videos and equipped with the instructions he provided I really wanted to try out creating something of my own. Unfortunately I had recently moved to Australia, meaning I no longer had any Airsoft guns, and I also didn’t have access to a good video camera. I thought about maybe doing something without guns at all, just using my hands and miming the firearms like in Spaced, and then it hit me; why not just use the Spaced scene anyway?

**This content is blocked in some regions on copyright grounds.** Sorry about that.

## Part 1


There’s a bit of a long intro on this, but I left it in to explain what’s going on. That, and it’s brilliant.

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/F8fiajbOUD8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen=""></iframe>

The scene was really not that hard to do. All the composited blood, smoke and fire was found free online; I made some minor tweaks to each item and compiled the library of “effects” that I could work from in AE.

Due to the free-hand camera work in Spaced, each clip had to be motion tracked, sometimes multiple times depending on effects needed in the foreground and background.

The biggest time sink of all was “lighting” the people; some of my masking work was a little harsh, as was the additive lighting for the muzzle flare, but it’s all part of learning.



## Part 2

Quite some time after Part 1 was complete, I has a crack at the latter part of the episode, where Daisy applies the things she’d learnt about “male intuition” to escape a potential kicking.

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/wOT3M0xq8Uc" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen=""></iframe>

This second scene is a lot, lot longer than the first. To make life easy on myself, I cut the footage into several different Compositions, so I could work on them one at a time without the risk of breaking something from earlier in the scene.

Again every clip needed to be motion tracked, however some of the footage didn’t lend itself to auto tracking due to how dark it was, so some manual tracking was required. A lot of the composited items needed blurring (fast blur, and motion blur to match the scene), plus colour correction.

Matching up Daisy’s hand movements for the Machinegun and placing the muzzle flash at the correct position was quite an involved process. I also ran out of unique muzzle flash images (I had three!), so I rotated, flipped and sometimes composited two to make my own. I figured seeing the same muzzle flash come up too many times would ruin the experience. I also caked her clips with an ever growing cloud of dust as she unleshes her barrage of gunfire.

The final time consuming item was making Tim and the students blood splatter appear on the floor. Luckily the camera doesn’t do any 3d panning, so a few careful motion tracks let me get this in the shot, but they needed some rotoscoping and scene-matching to fit them in.


## Conclusion

All in all, these scenes were a great tool for learning how to do simple composites in After Effects; I got a chance to learn motion tracking, comping, colour correction/scene matching, masking/rotoscoping and not worry about the source footage. It gave me a great look around After Effects without doing anything too serious, and if it didn’t work out I wouldn’t be annoyed because I didn’t spend any time creating the source footage – it wasn’t entirely my project, and I didn’t have any resources on the line.

I think the effects look quite good, though they’re not perfect. It being not my footage, I couldn’t colour correct the whole scene, which would have helped to hide some of the ones which didn’t fit too well.

It’s still really awesome to see how they came out, though.
